---
title: "Reflections on “Funemployment,” Work Values, and Bay Area Counter-Culture"
date: 2023-06-12T11:04:25+01:00
draft: false
---

*It's a Monday and all six of my housemates sit around our long wooden kitchen table. It's 1:30pm and we're enjoying a leisurely brunch. Just as we are about dive into fluffy scrambled eggs, two more neighborhood friends unexpectedly enter our kitchen, having let themselves in with our liberally-copied house key.*

*This meal convened spontaneously, with all of us meandering into the kitchen, hungry, at around the same time. Sophie, let's call her, who commutes to Apple Park in Cupertino 3 days a week, exclaims, "Is this what it's always like at home during the week these days??" She is the last remaining housemate with a full-time, 9'-5' job. The rest of us, products of recent tech lay-offs, burn-out, and/or finally taking the leap to pursue our independent, creative endeavors, look around with sheepish grins..."Yeah haha, you should work from home more often! Or better yet, quit your job already!"*

**Introduction**

From its inception, San Francisco's entrepreneurial spirit has lent itself to unconventional work hours. But today, many young inhabitants of the city find themselves having particularly un-structured weekdays. There is an atmosphere of change, even refusal among those who reject the dinner-party question of, "So, what do you do [for work]?" I see this nonconformity to traditional job titles as not a mere coincidence but rather a particular response to the current moment in history, and the Bay Area specifically. It is heartening to witness the commitment to stand back and reconsider traditional, capitalist work culture, while not running away from it entirely. The real value comes from people who come back to inspire a different way.

**Funemployment**

The portmanteau "fun-employed" is colloquially used to describe individuals who are not employed and not actively seeking employment, instead enjoying their free time on their own terms. While it is a widely used term in the Bay Area, I find it somewhat narrow in scope. It insinuates a short-term mentality that is not ubiquitously held. I'm interested in the changing attitudes towards work that are not only held by those who actually qualify for unemployment, but also those who work part-time, freelance, or generate income outside of the typical bay area "tech" career paths. Further, for many, this time is not quite "fun," ie. a time to party and explore fanciful hobbies, but rather one carrying a weightiness of searching for inner alignment. It's worth calling out the inherent privilege inherent in any kind of "taking a break" from work, as prolonged unemployment is infeasible for the vast majority of people.

Although most of us will eventually go back to "work," when we do, it will feel markedly different. I predict that many of my friends will re-enter traditional '9-5' employment in entirely new fields, many will reject that entirely, finding creative solutions to financially support a less structured, more nomadic lifestyle, and all of us will orient towards our work identities in radically new ways.

Personally, what's changed is the value I place on how I *feel* throughout my day. Despite having an abundance of time, I hold a higher standard for how I spend it because the choice is mine. ***What*** I am doing is less important than ***how I am doing it.*** As I consider my next job, the most important factor is that my collaborators carry the same attitude towards problem solving--- one rooted in presence, mindfulness, and play.

**Why now?**

What makes this current reconfiguration of work and personal identity unique? First of all, it's happening at a particular moment in time, influenced by the enduring remote work policies catalyzed by COVID-19 and the tens of thousands of young people impacted by tech layoffs. On a smaller temporal scale, there is also the fact that many of my friends, myself included, are in our late 20s and experiencing a belated quarter-life crisis of sorts ( I believe COVID is the reason for the delay). But most importantly, there is a larger cultural wave questioning the way that we work and live, asking, "Is there another, better way?"

**Proving my expectations wrong**

I greatly admire the attitude my friends and community bring to the newfound abundance of time around us. I admit though, it proved my expectations wrong. I, as part of this wave, am also defying the nature of a younger version of myself. Despite the stereotypical "move fast and break things" culture of the Bay Area, the guiding values are overwhelmingly of rest, non-instrumentality, curiosity, and play. In a city full of eager, high-achieving techies believing they will be the one to found a startup defying the high probability of failure, the conversations around me are (refreshingly) dominated by The Artists' Way reading groups, long-term plans for intergenerational communal living, new forms of somatic therapy, authentic relating workshops, among many other non-capitalist themes. (Of course, these examples display other stereotypes of San Francisco!)

At the core of the "funemployment" experience is grappling with a new (or perhaps old?) sense of time, that myself and many others have forgotten since childhood. As Jenny Odell recounts in her book, ***Saving Time: Discovering a Life Beyond the Clock,*** it is a very American notion to consider busyness a good thing. To uphold an image of industry, self-improvement, and consistent hard work is deeply rooted in our nation's Protestant, capitalist business principles. The late 20th-century Progressive Era tenants of efficiency, rationalism, and measurement continue to influence our 21st century orientation towards work culture. Boot-strapping cultures, such as Silicon Valley, are particularly vulnerable to the "gospel of productivity." At its core is the individualist notion that you don't need anyone but yourself to achieve freedom (financial or otherwise).

What I'm observing now in the Bay Area is by no means the first time Bay Area communities have rejected the idea that work equates to selling your time to someone else. Productivity-gurus and life-hackers like Tim Ferris, author of **The Four Hour Workweek**, have for over a decade, espoused the merits of working for yourself, reclaiming your time, and getting paid to do what you love. That is all very well and good, but the often extreme culture surrounding these "productivity bros" and "life hackers" has gotten to the point where, while you may not have a boss anymore, you've become your own, even stricter boss. For example, we often see an obsession with routines, particularly morning routines, that exploit healthy habits like gratitude journaling and meditation in order to increase personal productivity. Among my community of "funemployed" friends, however, I'm witnessing a simultaneous rejection of work as "selling your self/time" to a "Boss" as well as the individualist productivity-gospel driving much of entrepreneurship culture.

Oliver Burkeman, author of **Why Time Management is Ruining Our Lives**, writes that especially when employment is insecure, there is a pressure to demonstrate our usefulness through frenetic doing. This made sense to me, as I recalled periods of idleness in my own life, such as immediately after my college graduation in May 2020. With job-prospects looking slim to none at the start of the global pandemic, I enrolled in data analytics, applied economics, and personal finance online classes through HBS. As I sat in my desk at my parents' house reading yet another job rejection email, I felt somewhat assuaged that I was spending my time increasing my hire-ability (as a liberal arts major). Even so, I struggled to relax at all that summer, itching to do something, anything that felt like progress. I even began anxiously studying for the GMAT even though I had no real intention to go to grad school at that time.

Personally and for my friends, that attitude is markedly absent during this period of unstructured time. Instead, we've been spending time sitting around in each others apartments or at the [SF Commons](https://www.thesfcommons.com/), following multi-hour, non-sequitur conversations and being silly. For many of us, this is the first time that we've had a proper "break" in years, and the sense of having an abundance of time, that is under only our control, is exceedingly refreshing. It feels so good and so different to prioritize rest, maintenance, and playful curiosity. It is a process of tuning into our true desires, to consider the wild idea that we could actually only do the things that we really want to do. The feeling of liberation that comes with that is so powerful that many of us, myself included are asking ourselves, "How can we make this the default way of being, while making it financially sustainable?"

**How are people spending their time?**

So, how are we actually spending our unburdened time? Well, two of my friends have been designing their own strategy and deception board games. One of my housemates, known to pull regular all-nighters coding, has channeled his energy into over-the-top themed-parties. One of such events included a Ratatouille eat-along, where he cooked 13 different dishes to pair with each food siting. Another party was jello-themed, which included a jello slip-and-slide, jello baths, and jello wrestling. A different friend goes to Ocean Beach everyday and watches the sunset religiously. My other housemate, who switched to part time at her tech investing job, sees those 10 hours as the financial means to sustain efforts publishing a collection of creative essays. At the SF Commons, a hub for the curious, I see others delving into music and language learning, philosophy book clubs, live-coding/ VJing, meaning and belonging discussion groups, among many other non-capitalist past-times. On my end, I've gone through phases painting murals, publishing a book of poetry, learning some acrobatic sports, crying a lot, laughing a lot, and sleeping a lot.

**A Global Movement; A Bay Area Subculture**

How much of this collective exhaustion, refusal, and dreaming of a different way to live/work is unique to the Bay Area? Based on some recent conversations with my brother in Amsterdam and some friends in Berlin, it's clear that the reappraisal of work among young people, particularly those who work in the tech sector, is not limited to the United States. That being said, the culture and history of the Bay Area bring a unique flavor that, I argue, makes the attitude especially pronounced here.

San Francisco has deep roots in counter-culture. There were the Beatniks in the 50s then the blossoming hippie movement, popularization of psychedelics, and adoption of eastern spirituality, climaxing in the 1967 Summer of Love. As Fred turner, author of ***From Counterculture to Cyberculture,*** explains, the late 1960s and early 1970s extended that counter-culture through an entanglement of New Communalist visions of consciousness and community with cybernetic theories of decentralization and personalization. The resulting "techno utopianism," encapsulated in Stewart Brand's *Whole Earth Catalog* and the founding story of Apple shaped the Silicon Valley that we know today. The 1984 Apple Macintosh was even explicitly marketed as a "device one could use to tear down bureaucracies and achieve individual intellectual freedom"(Turner). The sense of information's transformative, even government-toppling, potential lives on in the tech attitude of San Francisco, especially in the crypto and AI worlds.

Yet, there also is a large disillusionment with tech progress over the last decade. Historian Margaret O'Mara, in her [piece](https://www.aei.org/economics/silicon-valley-an-unrepeatable-miracle-a-long-read-qa-with-margaret-omara/) on Silicon Valley, writes: "We were promised flying cars and all we got was 140 characters." Perhaps there is a disillusionment with the tech industry or knowledge economy generally, which tracks with the increasingly popular movement to a remote eco-village and a simpler way of life. (I find myself, as I write this, in an intentional, creative, sustainable community in Portugal for the summer). Further, while "funemployed" is a popular Bay Area term, **I'm noticing more people responding to the question of, "What do you do?" instead, with something like: "trying my best", "in transition", "reconnecting with my soul", or simply, "being human."** Not self identifying in relation to the world of "employment" alludes to a deeper, more permanent, departure from the conventional ways of working.

That said, it's not quite right to say that the rebelliousness against "work," in myself, and my friends, is anti-tech. Rather, there's a quest for meaning in the work that we do, and a much of that reflection ties back to what is very much alive in the Bay Area. In my experience, it's something like --- yes, lets move to the countryside with our friends, dance ecstatically, and eat from our vegetable garden... as we continue to discuss AI alignment, climate change, and the latest from the Twittersphere (lol). At the end of the summer, we will return to one city or another, not ready to permanently leave it all behind just yet. Bay Area-based author and critic Jenny Odell encourages us to take a participatory but distanced stance towards the capitalist, knowledge economy, what she calls 'standing apart.' To stand apart means, "not fleeing your enemy, but knowing your enemy, which turns out not to be the world but the channels through which you encounter it day to day." I believe this is what we, at least aspirationally, are doing.

I'm struggling to sort out two seemingly polar cultures dually held by "Bay residents" (even if they no longer live in the Bay) and how they relate to the current attitudes of non-traditional employment, if at all. On one side of the coin, there is the techy-innovative/entrepreneurial-capitalist/fast side of San Francisco. And on the other, there is the communal/spiritual/anti-materialist/back-to-the-land/slow side of San Francisco. Perhaps an extreme of the first dynamic leads to a rebound effect towards the later. Or more likely, **my hypothesis is that, underlying both is visionary utopianism, a willingness to counter the status quo, and deep dissatisfaction with anything short of true meaning.** The ex-Google, ex-founder, side-hedge fund hustler is the same guy as the one living in the 30-person group house espousing non-violent-communication and training to become a ketamine therapist. The duality is core to the phenomenon. I believe this is why Burning Man and other playful festivals like Take Three, etc. are so popular among Bay residents --- they provide a balancing antidote to the immense competition held in the private sector, and simultaneously a continuation of the values that drive them to start their companies in the first place.

**Conclusion**

"You don't have to leave industrial society, but you don't have to accept it the way it is," said Lee Felsentein, one of the original members of the [Homebrew Computer Club](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homebrew_Computer_Club). There is immense value in "taking time off," and for that reason I appreciate the normalization of unemployment through the culture of "funemployment." It is heartening to witness the commitment to stand apart, but not leave. As I end my own "funemployment," I return to San Francisco with new work values, a desire to find other like-minded people, and a determination to practice what I preach. Let's "work" in a way that is meaningful, human, and playful.