---
title: "Climate-Focused Impact Investing from Catalytic Capital to Green Bonds"
date: 2020-11-17T11:04:25+01:00
draft: false
tags: ["climate"]
---

*I wrote and produced a [podcast episode](https://www.thegoodrushpodcast.com/episodes/episode/2855d4d8/the-tip-of-the-iceberg-climate-finance) and accompanying article investigating climate-focused impact investing, featuring voices from [Prime Coalition](https://www.primecoalition.org/), [Terra Alpha Investments](https://terraalphainvestments.com/), [The MacArthur Foundation](https://www.macfound.org/programs/climate/), [Westpath Investments](https://www.wespath.org/), [Climate Bonds Initiative](https://www.climatebonds.net/), [The Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility](https://www.iccr.org/iccrs-issues/environment), and the [Department of Economics and Macro-Finance at the University of the West of England, Bristol](https://people.uwe.ac.uk/Person/DanielaGabor).*

*Myself and a four others at Harvard Kennedy School's [Social Innovation and Change Initiative](https://sici.hks.harvard.edu/) produced a narrative journalism podcast mini-series exploring responsible and impact investing. We worked under the guidance of David Wood, Director of The Initiative for Responsible Investment at Harvard Hauser Center and Jean Rogers, founder of the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board.*

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Climate-Focused Impact Investing from Catalytic Capital to Green Bonds

Six months ago, I set out to understand the landscape of climate-focused impact investing with the goal of producing a podcast on the topic. To begin, I immersed myself in the world of acronyms, scouring sustainability reports and publications by the Global Reporting Initiative's (GRI), the Principles of Responsible Investment (PRI), and the United Nations Environment Program Finance Initiative (UNEP FI). I researched the history of climate-focused investing, catalyzed by Ceres after the Exxon Valdez oil spill, and the rising popularity of investor networks and ESG portfolios and instruments. Considering the diverse array of asset owners and managers pursuing impact investing, I asked myself, who are the actors most capable of making environmental impact --- private foundations and endowments, investment banks and companies, venture or public funds, or others, and what are they trying to achieve? I interviewed a dozen professionals in the field to try to answer this question and to understand the state of climate finance and impact investing more generally.

I encountered a range of investment strategies and climate goals spanning a spectrum of desired risk, returns, and impact, with pure philanthropy and returns-oriented investing marking each extreme. In this article, I explore financing structures prioritizing high impact as well as those that attempt to make conventional models more sustainable. Namely, catalytic capital and green bonds illustrate each approach. They each have unique strengths and weaknesses as they work to solve distinct problems in distinct contexts.

Despite their differences, investors with widely varying needs and goals view each other in the same landscape, analogous to how discrete countries view themselves and others on the same map. However, unlike 21st century cartographers, we are very much in the exploratory phase of understanding impact investing geography and the sphere of impact finance has yet to be circumnavigated.

The real question for impact investors is not whether they are doing good, but whether they are creating marginal good. The tension between the opposite sides of the spectrum boils down to impact focusing on scale versus additionality --- are investors pursuing solutions that promote technologies at the impact frontier or that scale up technologies already proven and economically viable? **I conclude that there's no perfect approach, but rather that distinct approaches along the spectrum complement each other, as well as those altogether outside of investment finance.

How we organize and perceive investing approaches determines their limitations or expansive possibilities. Looking out at the impact investing horizon, I ask, what else is left to be explored? And further, is our current map getting us closer to a more sustainable world or further away?

# Catalytic Capital

One approach is catalytic investing. This approach prioritizes high climate impact over market returns. Gigatons of atmospheric carbon saved is one metric for measuring climate impact, but there are many metrics used. While catalytic investments often do generate profit, they are primarily intended to spark additional outside investment in underfunded, high-impact projects. It is based on the notion of ‘additionality,’ what an economist might refer to as “thinking on the margin,”: investing in companies or products the regular market is not investing in on its own accord. Directed catalytic capital generates beneficial social outcomes that would not occur if not for this particular investment. It is an idiosyncratic investment tool that takes on uncertainty in product type and aims for major carbon mitigation goals.

One organization that exemplifies this approach is PRIME Coalition, founded by Sarah Kearney in 2007. PRIME is a public charity that directs philanthropic capital from private and family foundations towards catalytic investments in early-stage startups. The Prime Impact Fund invests in companies who project to reduce atmospheric carbon by 50 gigatons by 2050. In other words, they invest in cutting-edge technologies that have the potential for large-scale impact on climate change. What you might call ‘deep tech’ or ‘hard tech,’ these research-science companies carry more uncertainty in product, longer time horizons, and generally lesser known technologies, than, say, a software or app company. Prime’s catalytic capital fills the market gap in taking them from lab to commercial-scale. They help ambitious enterprises hurdle the rift of limited available capital between initial seed-funding and large-scale investment by giving them some extra runway to demonstrate their viability. As Kearney puts it:

It's not only difficult to do the sorting exercise of good investment from bad investment, but also among good investments, sorting which ones will be supported by our existing financial infrastructure like venture capital firms, angel investors, large corporates, and which ones could become large, thriving companies but won't otherwise be supported… whether it's because of disproportionate technology risk, lengthy technology development timeline, some type of regulatory risk that might be able to be mitigated, or just operating in an industry that doesn't garner attention from investors.

Catalytic investing is best suited for philanthropy-backed investors because they are most willing to trade a significant amount of risk for potential high environmental impact. John Balbach, Director of Impact Investments for climate solutions at the MacArthur Foundation, offers MacArthur’s investment in rooftop and off-grid solar in India as an example of their catalytic investment approach:

We could blow through our entire allocation for impact investments pretty quickly, just looking at ways that we could support climate in India more broadly. But we really tried to find a very specific capital gap, a gap that if we can invest it in a certain way, there could be a demonstration effect that could actually mobilize significantly more capital and help to ultimately create a market level impact, a systemic impact that would enable a flow of capital to open up where it was otherwise not happening.

In order to maximize impact from their comparatively small amount of capital, an organization like MacArthur must ask themselves, “what’s small enough for us to do but big enough to matter?” Balbach explained.

Still, the great disadvantage of the catalytic investment strategy is the small scale — right now, there is a limited amount of money with the appropriate impact to returns profile to engage in such strategies. The mission-drive market offers great, mostly untapped, potential, but compared to the trillions of dollars in public markets it’s a drop in the ocean. **Yet that does not reduce the importance of this strategy. In fact, the limited scope heightens the responsibility of those in the unique position to invest in high impact products that aren’t receiving sufficient attention otherwise. Balbach explains how foundations, in particular, are a type of asset owner capable of choosing the highest impact option, so they should fulfill that function:

As a large private foundation, we are one of a precious few sets of actors that can take very long term views on investing and be flexible, patient, and risk-tolerant. And that's what sits at the basis of catalytic capital investing. I think that we shouldn't take that responsibility lightly, as it’s a very precious form of capital to be deployed.

Catalytic investors can make investments that other asset owners are unable to because of their fiduciary or prudent investor requirements. For example, PRIME Coalition may direct capital from a private foundation into more efficient and cost effective lithium ion extraction for batteries, a high impact investment in the long term that traditional investors may deem too risky at this time. Prime’s adds value to the impact investing landscape both by channeling capital to solutions and offering its knowledge and expertise of the field to foundations that, on their own, might not make the investment themselves.

# Conventional Instruments

Closer to the other side of the investment landscape fall approaches that are lower-risk, higher return, but also lower impact. Using conventional investing instruments, the fundamental structure and process of investing stays the same, but practitioners incorporate climate concern by highlighting green investments and weeding out brown ones. For example, a fund specializing in mobility or energy industries may invest in enterprises that have already proven their technological or business success, such as Tesla or Vestas. Other sustainability-minded funds are industry agnostic but play their part by investing only in companies with small carbon footprints, like Shopify. In 2020, Blackrock, for instance, committed to removing from its portfolios any public companies that generate more than 25% of their revenues from thermal coal production.

Stock-market funds also have new climate-screened counterparts. The SPYX ETF, for example, follows the S&P 500-based index but excludes companies with known fossil fuel reserves. Another fund, called ETHO Capital, is more selective in their ESG ETF, excluding companies in the tobacco, weapons, gambling, and fossil fuel industries, as well as those with high greenhouse gas emissions or ESG conflicts of interest. ETHO is based on the investment thesis that climate pollution acts as a measure for both sustainability and operational efficiency and is the rationale for their ETF’s outperformance of the S&P 500. There are also green bond ETFs, like the GRNB, which is comprised of green bonds issued to finance environmentally friendly projects

Using conventional instruments for climate goals appeals to the broader set of traditional investors that have a fiduciary duty for generating competitive returns. While shooting for less lofty impact goals than catalytic investing, this approach is advantageous in that it can shift capital at scale, more so than a dark green project with a fairly localized impact. Larger institutional investors have a variety of tools — integrating ESG into their portfolio options, shareholder engagement, divestment. Out of this diverse set, I became particularly interested in the green bond.

# Green Bonds

Green bonds are a responsible investment (SRI) fixed-income product designed to support sustainability and climate-related projects. Structurally identical to “plain vanilla” conventional bonds, green bonds are distinguished by their “green” filter. They were pioneered by the European Investment Bank in 2007 and quickly followed by the World Bank in 2008, marking the first bond dedicated to a specific type of project. Green bonds became an attractive option to investors because of their tax exemptions and credits and proved to be well suited for the institutional investor market, particularly asset managers that have a long-term investment outlook, such as pension and insurance funds. Such funds have long-term investment horizons driven by obligations to multiple generations of beneficiaries, so they prefer conservative instruments that guarantee returns in the long-term. Fossil fuel industries are not viable in the long-term, so these farsighted investors take heed to divest from these portfolios.

Sean Kidney, the CEO of the Climate Bonds Initiative which works to create climate and sustainability standards and transparency in the green bond market, describes their purpose:

It's an instinct thing, institutional investors have in their DNA the need to look more long term than other investors because of their long term liability issue. Part of the Climate Bonds Initiative’s *raison d'etre* is to help them better understand long term risks, such as climate change — now becoming a short term risk — and then mobilize them to start thinking about their investment.

The appeal and rapid growth of the green bond market in the last decade is due in part to the pre-existing bond market. Bonds make up the largest asset class, accounting for $128 trillion of global markets. Green bonds and loans comprised only $250 billion of that total in 2019, but this was a new global record, up 51% from the prior year. Green bonds are rapidly gaining popularity and have a vast bond market to expand into. Financial players are already familiar with the financial structure of bonds, so this would entail only a simple switch to buying green bonds. Municipalities, companies, and banks can issue green bonds in the same way they have always done with regular bonds, but with increased attention to sustainability, environmental impact and climate risk. Aneil Tripathy, an economic anthropologist studying green bonds and the Academic Research Coordinator at the Climate Bonds Initiative, calls them a “straightforward hack” for greening investing. Regarding the simplicity of the design, Kidney, in our interview, exclaimed, “Green bonds sell like hotcakes on a Saturday morning fair, because of this simple, easy design feature about them.” Investors buy green bonds because they feel it’s the right thing to do, but it doesn’t challenge conventional financial frameworks.

David Wood, Director of the Initiative for Responsible Investment at Harvard Kennedy School, gave me his take on the theory of change behind green bonds. He explained that green bonds are meant to be a tool for systemic change, not because green bonds offer a new market or a different kind of credit for investors, but because they demonstrate a market for green projects. The growing market in green products convinces issuers of green bonds, like governments or companies, that they can invest in greener projects because there is a market out there to buy the bonds supporting that investment. In the long-term, issuers will change the way they design their projects. The motivation for investors to buy green bonds may be financial, but the end result is holistic system change.

Green bonds have many advantages, particularly their ease of introduction and scale of growth that additionality-focused investments lack. But they have their limitations. The main question with green bonds is whether they actually create net positive impact. The projects bundled in the World Bank’s green bonds could have been funded through their regular bonds. Currently, the green projects are pulled out of the general bond pool to make a green-only pool, with the promise to investors that any proceeds would be reinvested in green pools as well. It remains unclear whether aggregate behavior is changed at all by this separation, whether green bonds attract more money into green projects over time, or if impact remains net neutral. The challenge follows that if capital flows are made only slightly more sustainable through green bonds, even scaling up enormously would fail to create the amount of change required to face the challenges presented by climate risk. Green bonds are popular because they don’t require fundamental behavior changes, but that is also their downfall.

Furthermore, green bonds may not be all that green to begin with. Although the Climate Bonds Initiative created a certification scheme for green bonds and is partnering with governments to expand it, standards across green bonds, along with ESG ETFs and other green financial products, are not uniform. This makes them easy targets for greenwashing.

# Marginal Vs. Scale Impact

Every impact investing tool, green-washing aside, has a role to play, and at their best, are complementary. In order to extend the reach of impact as far as possible, investors should be using approaches across the entire financial landscape. If climate-focused impact investing were gardening, high risk, high impact investments are analogous to planting new plant varieties, while low risk solutions are analogous to weeding. Planting is the catalytic approach while weeding may include ESG portfolios, green bonds, divestment, shareholder engagement, or value-aligned venture capital. Weeding out fossil fuel portfolios, like spraying or fertilizing a lawn, puts less resources on the line and can cover more area in less time than planting. Impact investing with conventional instruments supports investments by making sure capital is not being diluted to “weeds.” Additionality-focused investing will create the future we want, but it will take patience to see the fruits of its labor.

While the linear spectrum of capital is a helpful tool for classifying approaches, we must also acknowledge the narrow view of the framework.  The continuum suggests that impact and returns are trade-offs, when a third variable – risk – makes the relationship of these metrics less simple. Increasingly, investors are measuring impact through standard or custom metrics — SROI, IRIS, Robin Hood, or GIIRS — positing that high impact and high returns is possible. Higher technology or investment risk, in this case, is what balances out the equation of profitability and social impact.

# **Skeptics of the Private-Sector**

No impact investing approach is without its weaknesses, but some critics of climate-focused finance question whether the private-sector is contributing at all, and if it might even be detrimental to the cause.

Daniella Gabor, Economics Professor at the University of the West of England, termed the private-finance led approach to climate change the “Wall Street Climate Consensus.” This route would involve a passive state allowing companies and investors to take the lead on climate action rather than making direct public investments and creating stronger regulatory frameworks via a “Green New Deal”. The debate boils down to the question: how well can the private sector regulate itself? Can shareholder engagement, consumer demand, and pledges by management be enough for private firms to consider long term sustainability and negative externalities, or will the short-run bottom line always trump impact? History suggests the private sector may not be so good at regulating itself, thus leaving much of the responsibility for maintaining a sustainable economy in the hands of the public sector.

That finance won’t solve all of our climate problems is not news to any of the foundations, investment funds, or institutional investors I interviewed. These practitioners are by no means ignorant of the boundaries of the private sector and understand the long-term demands sweeping societal changes. But isn’t contributing to impact right now, even marginally, better than doing nothing? Sean Kidney understands that green standards for bonds are lacking, but believes he’s found some room to maneuver within the rules of the game to create impact now. Sarah Kearney explained that the urgency of the climate crisis does not pose the question of “this or that,” but rather requires “this, that, and everything else.”

Considering the future of the impact investing movement, I ask: can we solve problems with the same kind of thinking as what caused them? If finance is the problem, should we exclude it from climate decisions, focusing only on regulating behavior? Or should we pay extra attention to the private sector, diving into “the belly of the beast,” to change its fundamental nature?

It is clear that we need to rewrite the rules of our finance in order to reach critical climate goals, but that is a long-term goal. In the mean-time, supporting innovative entrepreneurs and creating space within conventional financial tools are areas to start. It is possible that private-sector impact investing could become a “Wall Street Climate Consensus,” but a reformed market with cross-sector checks and supports can prevent this extractive future.

# Beyond Finance

Financial terms alone don’t comprehensively capture the scope of climate investing’s - real or intended - impact. In order to understand climate investing, we need to tackle the political, social, and ethical, considerations that complicate that landscape. Let’s have conversations not only about investments balancing risk and returns but also stakeholder and policy-led initiatives to push the climate agenda. How can shareholders and consumers pressure internal financial structures to change? What does it take to have strong state and central bank interventions not only incentivizing green but also penalizing brown behaviors? Company and state level behavior change only goes so far when systemic economic forces incentivize environmental devastation and climate change. with fiscal activism, equity, diversity, and environmental justice need to be, and increasingly are, topics on the table. Turning the needle on climate change depends upon understanding both the opportunities and limitations of the private-sector and thinking holistically about solutions. Rather than a continuum, we can frame impact finance as being part of a web.

The podcast is now live, but I have even more questions about impact investing than when I started. What I do know is that the scale of the climate crisis calls for changes at that same scale. In order to achieve the deep change required for our time, we need to not only create public standards for green investing and increase regulations, but also to rethink financial conventions at their core. Within finance, the scalable tools are not radical enough and the radical tools are not big enough. There is no silver bullet to fighting climate change across the private or public sectors; the path with real impact involves a coalition of all actors.

*Sources:*

*2019 Global Landscape of Climate Finance, Climate Policy Initiative*

*Translating to risk: The legibility of climate change and nature in the green bond market*